si Shawéna zho ki yashí busé okedí


The light in the factory was a bit dim. The air felt hot and stale. Zu Nawékö picked up yet another ruby off of the conveyor belt. She looked around for rough spots. Sure enough, there was still one left. She ran the ruby against the sanding block, checking again to make sure that she had sanded off the rough part. She then placed it back on the conveyer, which slowly moved it away towards na Tubési at the magic checking station.

Meanwhile, an emerald arrived on the conveyor belt. At least a little variety. She picked it up and looked for rough spots. This emerald had a lot of rough spots. She sanded it quickly, trying to make sure that she'd finish before another gem arrived. Fortunately, she managed to finish on time. She placed it back on the conveyor and waited for another gem to arrive.

After a moment, she thought the spacing must be off. The emerald had taken almost the full time, and yet no other gemstone had arrived. She took a moment to move her sore legs slightly. She always liked it when she got a short break. Maybe they were unloading the railway wagon a little slowly.

After a moment, another gem arrived. To zu Nawéko's surprise, it was an amethyst. Normally they didn't send such powerful gems through si Shawéna zho ki yashí busé okedí.

She picked up the gemstone. Even unpolished, it shimmered somewhat. It had a number of rough spots, but it struck zu Nawéko as unusually pretty, even though she worked with gems every day. She prepared to sand it, but stopped. She then took a brief look around, before sliding the amethyst into her shoe.

Another ruby came down the conveyor belt. She found the rough spots, sanded it, and placed it back on the conveyor belt. Then a jade came. She repeated the process. Then, just as an emerald was arriving, the conveyor belt slowed to a halt. Zu Nawéko let out a sigh. She stepped back from the conveyor belt and made her way towards the exit.

Zu Nawéko filed out the door, showing her manager shü Zanayé that her hands were empty. Shü Zanayé said "See you tomorrow." Zu Nawéko then walked out onto the street. 

It was night out. The light of the nearly full moon gave an almost shimmering quality to the cobblestone street. Zu Nawéko walked along the street beside the railway line, passing the glowing ruby streetlights. She reached some terraced houses, built of a slightly speckled stone. She walked up to one of the doors, unlocked it, and entered.

The interior of the house was dark. Zu Nawéko stepped onto the creaking floor, feeling her way across towards the back of the house. She eventually reached a small oak wood table with a drawer and a candleholder in the middle of the table. She opened the drawer and got out a candle and a matchbox. She placed the candle in the candleholder and struck a match. As she attempted to light the candle, the match went out. She struck another and reached up to light the candle. It went out again.

Suddenly, zu Matizé walked into the room. She was holding a lit candle in a candleholder, and shielding it with her hand. She carefully set it down on the table. Zu Nawéko set aside the burnt match and reached up to give zu Matizé a long hug.

"It's good to see you," zu Nawéko said.

"It's good to see you too," zu Matizé said.

"How was your day at work?" zu Nawéko asked.

Zu Matizé sighed. "Just another day," she said. "We spent all day unloading the zha Kuméne. How about you?"

Zu Nawéko reached into her shoe and picked up the amethyst. "I got this for us," she said.

Zu Matizé looked at it, puzzled. "An amethyst?" she asked. "Don't we need a ruby?"

"I know," zu Nawéko said. "Something about it just spoke to me."

Zu Matizé sighed. "I suppose we could sell it," she said. "Maybe that would cover fixing the leak in the roof."

Zu Nawéko frowned. "I wasn't thinking about selling it," she said.

"Then what are we using it for?" zu Matizé asked.

"I don't know," zu Nawéko said. "I just thought- you always talked about how you wanted to get away-"

"That's why we should sell it," zu Matizé said. "Maybe then, if we're lucky, we can afford to move out of this place."

"But don't you want to just activate it once?" zu Nawéko asked.

"And wind up in a random swamp somewhere?" zu Matizé said. "No, I don't."

Zu Nawéko sighed and set the amethyst down on the table. Zu Matizé carefully picked up the candle and moved it over to the corner of the room where the oak wood icebox was. She opened it and got out a light blue ceramic container filled with cold rice seasoned with olive oil. She closed the icebox and placed it on the table. She then moved the candle back to the table.

Zu Nawéko grabbed two spoons, handing one to zu Matizé. They each started eating from the container. Then, suddenly, zu Matizé's arm slipped. Her elbow slid into the candle, which fell over. The flame landed directly on the amethyst.

Both zu Nawéko and zu Matizé reached to upright the candle, but were forced back by the sudden sparks flying from the amethyst. The sparks were in all sorts of bright colours, and flew about the room. The room began to blur around them, and both zu Nawéko and zu Matizé began to feel dizzy. The sparks flew faster and faster, and zu Nawéko and zu Matizé both felt completely disoriented for a moment.

Suddenly, the surroundings began to clear. Zu Nawéko and zu Matizé found themselves sitting on a wooden floor. The amethyst lay between them. The candle was nowhere to be seen.

Zu Nawéko and zu Matizé slowly got up from the floor. They looked around at the massive room, with wooden walls stretching up to a ceiling high above them. There were doors in several of the walls, with glowing rubies placed above each one. High up near the ceiling, windows let additional light into the room.

Zu Nawéko looked at zu Matizé. "What have you done?" she asked.

"You think this is my fault?" zu Matizé said. "You were the one who acquired that stupid gemstone."

"But if we'd activated it properly," zu Nawéko said, "rather than just knocked a random candle on it, then maybe-"

Suddenly one of the doors burst open. Several guards, wearing olive green uniforms with purple bands, ran into the room. "Drop your weapons!" they ordered.

Zu Nawéko and zu Matizé both showed the guards that their hands were empty. The guards moved to surround them. One of them stood in front of zu Nawéko and zu Matizé.

"Why did you break into the palace?" she asked.

Zu Nawéko and zu Matizé both glanced at each other. After a moment zu Nawéko spoke. "We didn't mean to," she said. "We were teleported into the palace by that amethyst there."

"We want the actual explanation," the guard said. "Please no more ridiculous stories of accidental amethysts that-"

Suddenly footsteps became audible. All of the guards turned towards the door. Then suddenly, the Queen walked into the room.

Everyone, including all of the guards and zu Nawéko and zu Matizé, bowed to the Queen. The Queen then spoke to the guard that had been making demands from zu Nawéko and zu Matizé. "Who are these women?" she asked.

"My sincerest apologies, your majesty," the guard said. "They appeared to have entered the palace unlawfully through means unknown to us. We were just in the process of arresting them when you arrived. Once again, my sincerest apologies for-"

"What is that amethyst doing on the floor?" the Queen asked.

"My sincerest apologies, your majesty," the guard said. "Our current assessment is that it was used as a means of entering the palace unlawfully. One of the intruders claimed that it was accidental, however we have assessed that as unlikely and-"

The Queen turned to zu Nawéko and zu Matizé. "How did you obtain this amethyst?" she asked.

Zu Nawéko tried her best not to look away from the Queen, as she began to sweat profusely. "My sincerest apologies, your majesty," she said. "I believe it accidentally ended up in my possession at my work."

"Where do you work?" the Queen asked.

"I work at si Shawéna zho ki yashí busé okedí," zu Nawéko answered.

The Queen smiled. "And you accidentally transported yourself into the palace?" she asked.

"My sincerest apologies, your majesty," zu Nawéko said. "It was indeed an accident. Once again, my sincerest-"

The Queen turned back to the guard. "Fetch me that amethyst," she said.

The guard picked up the amethyst and handed it to the Queen. The Queen looked it over for a moment. "This appears quite valuable and unique," she observed. She then turned back to zu Nawéko and zu Matizé. "Thank you for bringing this gem to me," she said. "It will prove invaluable to zhi Nakiwá. In return for this great gift, I will give you another: an official escort out of the palace and off the grounds, without penalty for unlawful entry." She turned to the guards. "Lead them out of the palace," she said.

Zu Nawéko and zu Matizé followed the guards out of the door, making sure to keep their eyes on the Queen until she had left the room. They went through one of the doors and out into the palace gardens. After passing some bushes and trees, they walked along the edge of the garden, overlooking the ocean below. The moonlight reflected off of the waves, creating a shimmering effect.

The guards led zu Nawéko and zu Matizé to a large wooden gate in a stone wall, which they unlocked with a large key. They watched as zu Nawéko and zu Matizé walked out through the gate and onto the street. They then closed the gate behind them.

Zu Nawéko and zu Matizé set off down the street, away from the palace. After a moment of silence, zu Nawéko spoke.

"I never thought I'd meet the Queen," she said.

"Me neither," zu Matizé said. "It'll be kind of hard to keep this kind of secret."

"I don't think anyone would believe us," zu Nawéko said.

"Yeah," zu Matizé said. "Well, tomorrow I guess we just go back to work."

"Nothing more?" zu Nawéko asked.

"I don't think so," zu Matizé said. "Just don't accidentally acquire any more gems and we'll be okay."

"Yeah," zu Nawéko said. "You're probably right."

They walked on down the cobblestone street, under the ruby lights. The nearly full moon shone brightly down on the otherwise empty street. As they got closer to home, a train full of new gemstones passed on the track beside the street. Its brakes squealed as it slowed to a stop next to si Shawéna zho ki yashí busé okedí. Zu Nawéko and zu Matizé walked past. As they turned the corner, they clasped each other's hands. A gust of wind blew down the street as they walked out of sight.
